[MUSIC]
>> Jafar Husain: Let's
move on to stock ticker,
how many folks actually got to
this question of got past 26.
Okay we got one, two, three, excellent.
So this question is
actually an easy question.
We're going to take it a little
easy now we've taken it real hard.
What we're gonna do is we're gonna go
through this historical list of stock
prices.
So these are the NASDAQ stock prices from
who knows how long and all we wanna do
is we want to just filter it for
the ones that are only Microsoft.
And then I believe we want
to just print it out so
it looks like we just want to print
out all of the NASDAQ prices.
>> Jafar Husain: So
I think it's price records.
We just want to look for Microsoft.
So the name is MSFT.
>> Jafar Husain: I'm gonna run this.
>> Jafar Husain: What's going on here?
>> Jafar Husain: Does
this surprise anybody?
>> Jafar Husain: Why would
these results trickle in?
Every single result up till now has
just popped right up on to the screen.
Well what's actually going on here is
instead of querying a huge historical
database of NASDAQ prices, we are querying
live data now in reality I'm actually
spoofing this data but the point is we're
working over an asynchronous data source.
So we could just as easily could actually
be hitting the NASDAQ right now and
querying for real time stock prices.
So now we've actually made the switch
from querying arrays, historical data,
that's just been sitting in
a database somewhere or in memory.
To querying data as it comes in.
>> Audience: Yay!
>> Jafar Husain: Yay.
[APPLAUSE] Asynchronous programming,
I promised you'd get some, right?
So now we're finally realizing hopefully
that all the lessons that we've been
learning about how to process data up till
now, every single function you've learned.
If you can master that you can query
any asynchronous data source out there,
whether it's real time stock information,
right?
Whether it's an event,
whether it's a mouse move event.
You can assemble it all together to
build complex asynchronous programs
completely declaratively.
So, let's move on and start exploring this
new type, which I will call an observable.
So you guys saw in
the presentation yesterday.
Is that a question?
>> Audience: Is the reason
this works because we're
using ReactiveX's
implementation of forEach?
>> Jafar Husain: That's exactly right.
So an observable has a forEach
implementation, right?
The only difference between
the arrays forEach implementation,
which blocks until all the data in
the array's been slurped up and processed,
is the observables forEach implementation
finishes immediately, right?
Cuz it doesn't block.
But as the data arrives over time,
cuz let's recall an observable's
a collection that arrives over time.
As that data arrives over time,
this function that handles
that data gets processed.
Now let's remember forEach is
different than every other function
that I've taught you guys yesterday and
today.
What's different about it?
Can anybody tell me?
>> Audience: It doesn't modify the data,
it doesn't return an array.
>> Jafar Husain: It
doesn't return an array.
Every single other function I've taught
you up till now has returned an array,
with the exception of forEach.
And that's an important distinction.
What we're gonna be doing as we write
code, as you've seen up till now,
is we're gonna be using map,
filter, reduce, concatAll, and
zip to be building the collection we want.
And then finally once we've got
a collection that's exactly what we want,
whether it's an event or an array, and
we're ready to process the data inside and
do something with it, then and only then,
do we terminate with a forEach.
So those are really thinking
about things very separately.
First we're building the collection we
want, but notice we don't change anything.
When we build the collection we want,
we don't change anything at all.
When you take an array and
you map it and you create a new array,
you haven't changed the old array.
When you filter it,
you haven't change the old array.
Everything up to now it's been taking
data in and creating new data, but
now as we begin to use forEach
we move into a different phase.
We say you know what, now that I've
created exactly the data I want,
exactly the collection that I want,
I'm gonna take the data out and
now I'm gonna change something.
So inside a forEach you can expect
to see us modifying things, so
printing a record is a great example
of modifying something right?
I've written something out to the council,
that is actually a change.
Some where there's a buffer where
it's value has been changed.
Right, so
we're actually changing a global object.
In this case the console, whereas in map
and filter and reduce and concatAll,
and so on and so forth.
I only said that you could change objects
that you yourself created, right.
If you hand an object into
the function for map,
you shouldn't be modifying
with that object.
So it's a very different way of thinking
about what you're trying to do is
you're carving your program up.
You're taking the data,
which is really just computation,
where you're taking data in and
you're computing new data.
And you're separating it
from data that changes data.
Can anybody tell me why that would
be a positive or negative thing?
>> Jafar Husain: What's the point?
What's the point of separating data that
doesn't change anything from data that
changes something?
>> Jafar Husain: Well there's a whole
class of bugs that just can't exist in
code that doesn't change anything.
A whole class of bugs.
Has anybody here ever run off
the end of an array, for example?
Or had a bug because you change
the variable before you changed
another variable?
These are a class of bugs that
sometimes are called state bugs and
remember when I told you the enemy of
a complex asynchronous program was?
State, it's creating all those variables
to track all those asynchronous
things going on.
That's what we're trying to eliminate.
The interesting thing about what we're
learning today is that asynchronous
programming is,
another way of thinking about it is,
it's sometimes called
reactive programming.
Who's heard that term
reactive programming?
All right, a few people, right?
Now asynchronous programming in JavaScript
is necessarily reactive programming.
What reactive programming means is,
it's like the Hollywood principle.
Don't call me, I'll call you.
So you guys hand me a call back.
And then I'm gonna call that callback
at a totally unpredictable time, right?
So you subscribe to an array,
you hand it a callback,
and then you don't know when that
array's gonna call that callback, right.
So it's a bit of an odd position because
when you're running just synchronous code
top to bottom,
you control when your code is called.
But as soon as you hand
it to another function,
that function might call
it any arbitrary time.
Now if you structure your code.
So you use use a lot of state, you change
a lot of variables that might be changed.
Excuse me by a lot of the other functions.
Well all of a sudden
that's a real hard model
when you don't know when your
code is going to be called.
So that's why I'm teaching you functional
programming, this idea of functions,
which take data in and generate new data
at the same time as reactive programming.
Which is that idea of you giving
somebody else a callback and
them pushing to you,
deciding when your code gets called.
Even though these are two
separate concepts,
the reason why we learn them
together is that it's very,
very hard to build a program where
you're changing a bunch of state and
variables, and you can't predict
when your code is gonna get called.
Because who knows?
Your code might be called
in any particular order.
And if you're changing variables, it's
very hard to structure a program that way.
So if we take these two notions and put
them together, which is to say that look
I'm never gonna change any data other
than the data I generally create and own.
And you combine that with
reactive programming,
which is like I don't know when
my code's gonna get called.
By not modifying any shared data,
all of a sudden it's a wonderful thing,
because now it doesn't matter when
your code gets called, right?
If you're not changing a global object or
share data,
your code could get called in two seconds
or it could get called in five seconds or
it could get called in ten seconds and
it will just work.
That's why we take all of our code that
changes the world, global objects,
objects that we didn't create.
Like in this case the console, and
we move it all into the forEach, right?
That's when we decide that we're
ready to consume the data,
we're ready to take it out and we're gonna
limit all of our change code, all of our
do code, do things, change the world code,
inside of the forEach function.
Whereas everything above can
run in any particular order.
Well maybe the callback gets called in two
seconds, maybe calls and in five seconds.
It doesn't matter.
And so that's why it's so
important to learn functional programming.
This ability of I'm not gonna change
things, I'm gonna take data and
I'm gonna create new data.
Because it makes your code safe
to run in any particular order.
Does that make sense at
a high level anyways?
Right, if you can't predict when your
code's gonna get called, well you better
only change your own objects,
not objects that somebody else can change.
Cuz who knows what the state of
the world will be in two minutes, right?
Or ten minutes.
So that's why we're teaching
these two concepts together.
But it's hard to absorb both
of these concepts together and
that's why I spent the first day on
what is by far the hardest part.
Which is learning to change the way
you think about code from I'm gonna
change this variable, I'm gonna loop.
Even a loop itself involves
changing a variable, right?
A for loop involves changing a counter.
That's the kind of change that we want to
avoid cuz you create a counter variable
and every time around
the loop you change it again.
Even something as simple as that,
all of a sudden the order and
dependence of your program is sort of
dictated by when this counter changes.
We're trying to get away from
any kind of code changes.
So the first day was learning all
about functional programming.
And today we're gonna be learning
about reactive programming,
asynchronous reactive programming,
technically.